Madam deputy speaker, a
year ago in my first budget
I announced our initial
response to coronavirus.
What was originally thought
to be a temporary disruption
to our way of life has
fundamentally altered it.
People are still being told
to stay in their homes.
Businesses have been
ordered to close.
Thousands of people
are in hospital.
Much has changed.
But one thing has
stayed the same.
I said I would do
whatever it takes.
I have done, and I will do so.
Hear, hear, hear.
We have announced over £280bn
of support, protecting jobs,
keeping businesses afloat,
helping families get by.
Despite this
unprecedented response,
the damage coronavirus has done
to our economy has been acute.
Since March, over 700,000
people have lost their jobs.
Our economy has shrunk by
10 per cent, the largest
fall in over 300 years.
Our borrowing is the highest
it has been outside of wartime.
It's going to take this
country and the whole world
a long time to recover from
this extraordinary economic
situation.
But we will recover.
This Budget meets the moment
with a three-part plan
to protect the jobs
and livelihoods
of the British people.
First, we will
continue doing whatever
it takes to support the
British people and businesses
through this moment of crisis.
Second, once we are
on the way to recovery
we will need to begin
fixing the public finances.
And I want to be honest today
about our plans to do that.
And third, in today's
Budget we begin the work
of building our future economy.
Madam deputy speaker,
today's forecasts
show that our response to
coronavirus is working.
The prime minister
last week, set
out our cautious, but
irreversible roadmap
to ease restrictions, whilst
protecting the British people.
The NHS, deserving
of immense praise,
has had extraordinary
success in vaccinating
more than 20m people
across the United Kingdom.
And combined with our
economic response,
one of the most comprehensive
and generous in the world,
this means the Office
for Budget Responsibility
are now forecasting in their
words, "a swifter and more
sustained recovery" than
they expected in November.
The OBR now expect
the economy to return
to its pre-Covid level by
the middle of next year,
six months earlier than
previously thought.
That means growth is faster,
unemployment lower, wages
higher, investment higher,
household incomes higher.
But while our prospects
are now stronger,
coronavirus has done, and is
still doing profound damage.
And today's forecast made clear,
repairing the long-term damage
will take time.
The OBR still expect
that in five years' time,
because of coronavirus, our
economy will be 3 per cent
smaller than it would have been.
Before I share the detail
of the OBR's forecast,
let me thank Richard Hughes
and his team for their work.
The OBR forecast that our
economy will grow this year
by 4 per cent, by 7.3 per cent
in 2022, then 1.7 per cent,
1.6 per cent, and 1.7 per
cent in the last three years
of the forecast.
And the OBR have said that our
interventions to support jobs
have worked.
In July last year they
expected unemployment to peak
at 11.9 per cent.
Today, because of
our interventions,
they forecast a much lower
peak, 6 and a half per cent.
That means 1.8m fewer people are
expected to be out of work than
previously thought.
But every job lost
is a tragedy, which
is why protecting, creating,
and supporting jobs
remains my highest priority.
So, Madam deputy speaker,
let me turn straight away
to the first part of
this Budget's plan
to protect the jobs
and livelihoods
of the British people
through the remaining
phase of this crisis.
First, the furlough
scheme will be extended
until the end of September.
For employees there will
be no change to the terms.
They will continue to receive
80 per cent of their salary
for hours not worked
until the scheme ends.
As businesses reopen
we will ask them
to contribute,
alongside the taxpayer
to the cost of paying
their employees.
Nothing will change until July,
when we will ask for a small
contribution of
just 10 per cent ,
and 20 per cent in
August and September.
The government is proud
of the furlough, one
of the most generous
schemes in the world
effectively protecting millions
of people's jobs and incomes.
Second, support for
the self-employed
will also continue
until September,
with a fourth grant covering
the period February to April,
and a fifth and final
grant from May onwards.
The fourth grant will provide
three months of support
at 80 per cent of
average trading profits.
For the fifth grant,
people will continue
to receive grants worth three
months of average profits
with the system open for
claims from late July.
But as the economy
reopens over the summer
it is fair to target our support
towards those most affected
by the pandemic.
So people whose turnover has
fallen by 30 per cent or more
will continue to receive
the full 80 per cent grant.
People whose turnover has
fallen by less than 30 per cent
will therefore have less
need of taxpayer support
and will receive a
30 per cent grant.
And I can also announce a
major improvement in access
to the self-employed scheme.
When the scheme was launched
a newly self-employed
couldn't qualify
because they hadn't all
filed the 19-20 tax return.
But as the tax return
deadline has now
passed I can announce today
that provided they filed a tax
return by midnight last
night, over 600,000 more
people, many of whom became
self-employed last year,
can now claim the
fourth and fifth grants.
Hear, hear, hear.
Over the course of this crisis
we will have spent £33bn
supporting the self-employed,
one of the most generous
programmes for self-employed
people anywhere in the world.
Third, we're also
extending our support
for the lowest paid
and most vulnerable.
To support low income households
the universal credit uplift
of £20 a week will continue
for a further six months,
well beyond the end of
this national lockdown.
We'll provide working
tax credit claimants
with equivalent support
for the next six months.
And because of the way that
system works operationally,
we will need to do so with
a one-off payment of £500.
And over the course of
this year as the economy
begins to recover we are
shifting our resources
and focus towards getting people
into decent, well-paid jobs.
We reaffirm our
commitment to end low pay,
increasing the national living
wage to £8.91 from April,
an annual pay rise of almost
£350 for someone working full
time on the national
living wage.
And my right honourable
friends, the education secretary
and the work and pensions
secretary are taking action
to give people the skills they
need to get jobs or get better
jobs.
The Restart Programme,
supporting over a million
long-term unemployed people.
The number of work
coaches doubled.
The Kickstart scheme
funding high-quality jobs
for over a quarter of
a million young people.
The prime minister's
lifetime skills
guarantee, giving every
adult the opportunity
for a fully-funded level
three qualification.
And we want businesses to
hire new apprentices so we're
paying them more to do it.
Today, I am doubling the
incentive payments we give
businesses to £3,000.
That's for all new
apprentice hires of any age,
alongside investing £126m of
new money to triple the number
of traineeships.
We're taking what works
to get people into jobs
and making it better.
Hear, hear, hear.
Madam deputy speaker, one of
the hidden tragedies of lockdown
has been the increase
in domestic abuse.
So I'm announcing today an extra
£19m on top of the £125m we
announced at the spending
review for domestic violence
programmes to reduce the risk
of reoffending and to pilot
a network of respite rooms
to provide specialist support
for vulnerable homeless women.
To recognise the sacrifices
made by so many women and men
in the armed forces community,
I'm providing an additional
£10m to support veterans
with mental health needs.
And on current
plans, the funding
to support survivors of
the Thalidomide scandal
runs out in 2023.
They deserve better than to
have constant uncertainty
about the future
costs of their care.
So not only will I extend this
funding with an initial down
payment of around £40m, I am
today announcing a lifetime
commitment, guaranteeing
funding forever.
And let me thank the Thalidomide
Trust and the honourable member
for North Dorset for their
leadership on this important
issue.
As well as supporting people's
jobs, incomes, the lowest
paid, and most vulnerable,
this Budget also
protects businesses.
We've been providing businesses
with direct cash grants
through the recent restrictions.
These grants come
to an end in March.
I can announce today that we
will provide a new Restart
Grant in April to
help businesses
reopen and get going again.
Non-essential retail
businesses will open first.
So they will receive grants
of up to £6,000 per premises.
Hospitality and
leisure businesses,
including personal
care and gyms will
open later, or be more impacted
by restrictions when they do.
So we'll give them
grants of up to £18,000.
That's £5bn of new grants, on
top of the £20bn we've already
provided, taking our direct
total cash support to business
to £25bn.
And I pay tribute to my
right honourable friend,
the member for Romsey
and Southampton North
for highlighting the particular
needs of the personal care
sector.
And with my right honourable
friend the culture secretary,
we're making available £700m
to support our incredible arts,
culture, and sporting
institutions as they re-open.
Backing the UK and Ireland's
joint 2030 World Cup bid,
launching a new approach to
apprenticeships in the creative
industries, and extending our
£500m film and TV production
Restart Scheme.
Even with the new
restart grants,
some businesses will also need
loans to see them through.
As the Bounce Back Loan
and CBILS programmes come
to an end, we're introducing
a new recovery loan scheme
to take their place.
Businesses of any size can
apply for loans from £25,000 up
to £10m through to
the end of this year.
And the government will
provide a guarantee
to lenders of 80 per cent.
Last year, we provided an
unprecedented 100 per cent
business rates holiday in
England for all eligible
businesses in the
retail, hospitality,
and leisure sectors,
a tax cut worth £10bn.
This year, we'll continue with
the 100 per cent business rates
holiday for the
first three months
of the year, in other words,
through to the end of June.
For the remaining nine
months of the year,
business rates will still
be discounted by two-thirds,
up to a value of £2m
for closed businesses,
with a lower cap for those who
have been able to stay open,
a £5bn tax cut for business.
One of the hardest
hit sectors has
been hospitality and tourism.
150,000 businesses that
employ over 2.4m people need
our support.
To protect those
jobs, I can confirm
that the 5 per cent
reduced rate of VAT
will be extended for six months
to the 30th of September.
Hear, hear, hear.
And even then, we
won't go straight back
to the 20 per cent rate.
We'll have an interim rate
of 12 and half per cent
for another six months, not
returning to the standard rate
until April of next year.
In total, we're cutting back
next year by almost £5bn.
Madam deputy speaker,
the housing sector
supports over half
a million jobs.
The cut in stamp
duty I announced
last summer has helped
hundreds of thousands of people
buy a home and supported the
economy at a critical time.
But due to the sheer
volume of transactions
we're seeing many new
purchases won't complete
in time for the end of March.
So I can announce today the
£500,000 nil-rate band will not
end on the 31st of March.
It will end on the 30th of June.
Then, to smooth the
transition back to normal,
the nil-rate band
will be £250,000,
double its standard level
until the end of September.
And we will only return to the
usual level of £125,000 from
October the 1st.
Even with the stamp
duty cut there is still
a significant barrier to
people getting on the housing
ladder, the cost of a deposit.
So I'm announcing
today a new policy
to stand behind home buyers,
a mortgage guarantee.
Lenders who provide mortgages
to home buyers who can only
afford a 5 per cent deposit
will benefit from a government
guarantee on those mortgages.
And I'm pleased to say that
several of the country's
largest lenders, including
Lloyds, NatWest, Santander,
Barclays, and HSBC will be
offering these 95 per cent
mortgages from next month.
And I know more,
including Virgin Money
will follow shortly after.
A policy that gives people
who can't afford a big deposit
the chance to buy
their own home.
As the prime
minister has said, we
want to turn generation
rent into generation buy.
So Madam deeputy speaker, the
furlough extended to September.
Self-employed grants
extended to September.
Universal credit uplift
More money to tackle
domestic violence, bigger
incentives to hire apprentices,
higher grants to struggling
businesses, extra funds for
culture, arts, and sport,
new loan schemes to
finance businesses,
kick-start start, restart,
a lifetime skills guarantee,
business rate, cut.
VAT, cut.
Stamp duty, cut.
And a new mortgage guarantee,
the first part of a Budget
that protects the
jobs and livelihoods
of the British people.
Hear, hear.
And, Madam deputy
speaker, as you can see,
we're going long,
extending our support
well beyond the
end of the road map
to accommodate even the most
cautious view about the time it
might take to exit
the restrictions.
Let me summarise for
the House the scale
of our total fiscal
response to coronavirus.
At this Budget, we are
announcing an additional £65bn
of measures over this year and
next to support the economy
in response to coronavirus.
Taking into account the
significant support announced
at the spending review, this
means our total Covid support
package this year
and next is £352bn.
And once you include the
measures announced at spring
budget last year, including
the step change in capital
investment, total fiscal support
from this government over this
year and next amounts to £407bn.
Coronavirus has caused
one of the largest,
most comprehensive, and
sustained economic shocks
this country has ever faced.
And by any objective
analysis, this government
has delivered one of the
largest, most comprehensive,
and sustained responses
this country has ever seen.
Hear, hear, hear.
So madam deputy speaker,
we're using the full measure
of our fiscal
firepower to protect
the jobs and livelihoods
of the British people.
But the damage done
by coronavirus,
combined with a level of support
unimaginable only 12 months ago
has created huge challenges
for our public finances.
The OBR's fiscal forecast
show that this year,
we have borrowed a
record amount, £355bn.
That's 17 per cent of our
national income, the highest
level of borrowing
since world war two.
Next year, as we continue our
unprecedented response to this
crisis, borrowing is
forecast to be £234bn,
10.4 per cent of GDP, an amount
so large it has only one rival
in recent history, this year.
Without corrective
action, borrowing
would continue at
very high levels,
leaving underlying debt
rising indefinitely.
Instead, because of the
steps I am taking today,
borrowing falls to 4 and and a
half per cent of GDP in 2223,
3.5 per cent in 2324,
then 2.9 per cent
and 2.8 per cent in the
following two years.
And while underlying debt
rises from 88.8 per cent of GDP
this year to 93.8
per cent next year,
it then peaks at 97.1
per cent in 2324,
before stabilising and falling
slightly to 97 per cent
and 96.8 per cent in the final
two years of the forecast.
Let me explain why this matters.
The amount we borrowed
is comparable only
with the amount we borrowed
during the two world wars.
It's going to be the
work of many governments
over many decades
to pay it back.
Just as it would be
irresponsible to withdraw
support too soon,
it would also be
irresponsible to allow our
future borrowing and debt
to rise unchecked.
When crises come, we
need to be able to act.
And we need the fiscal
freedom to act, a freedom
that you only have if you
start with public finances
in a good and strong place.
The only reason we have been
able to respond as boldly as we
have to Covid is
because 10 years
of Conservative
governments painstakingly
rebuilt our fiscal resilience.
Absolutely true.
When the next crisis comes, we
need to be able to act again.
And while our borrowing costs
are affordable right now,
interest rates and inflation
may not stay low forever.
And just a 1 percentage point
increase in both would now cost
us over £25bn.
And as we have
seen in the markets
over the last few weeks,
sovereign bond yields
can rise sharply.
This Budget is not the time
to set detailed fiscal rules
with precise targets and
dates to achieve them by.
I don't believe that
would be sensible.
But I do want to be
honest about what
I mean by sustainable
public finances
and how I plan to achieve them.
Our fiscal decisions are
guided by three principles.
First, while it is right to
help people and businesses
through an acute crisis like
this one, in normal times,
the state should
not be borrowing
to pay for every-day
public spending.
Second, over the medium term,
we cannot allow our debt to keep
rising.
And given how high
our debt now is,
we need to pay close attention
to its affordability.
And third, it is sensible
to take advantage
of lower interest rates to
invest in capital projects that
can drive our future growth.
So the question is,
how we achieve that.
How we balance the
extraordinary support
we are providing to
the economy right now
with the need to begin the work
of fixing our public finances.
I have, and always will
be honest with the country
about the challenges we face.
So I'm announcing today two
measures to begin that work.
Let me take each in turn.
Madam deputy speaker, our
response to coronavirus
has been fair, with the poorest
households benefiting the most
from our interventions.
And our approach to fixing the
public finances will be fair
too, asking more of those people
and businesses who can afford
to contribute and
protecting those who cannot.
So this government
is not going to raise
the rates of income tax,
national insurance, or VAT.
Instead, our first step is to
freeze personal tax thresholds.
We've nearly doubled the
income tax personal allowance
over the last decade,
making it the most generous
of any G20 country.
We will of course, deliver our
promise to increase it again
next year to £12,570.
But we will then keep it
at this more generous level
until April 2026.
The higher rate threshold will
similarly be increased next
year to £50,270.
And will then also remain at
that level for the same period.
Nobody's take-home pay
will be less than it is now
as a result of this policy.
But I want to be
clear with all members
that this policy does remove
the incremental benefit created
had thresholds continued
to increase with inflation.
We are not hiding it.
I am here explaining
it to the House.
And it is in the Budget
document in black and white.
It is a tax policy.
It is progressive and fair.
Hear, hear.
And I will also maintain at
their current levels until
April 2026, the
inheritance tax thresholds,
the pensions lifetime allowance,
the annual exempt amount
and capital gains tax, and
for two years from April 2022,
the VAT registration
threshold, which,
at £85,000 will remain more
than twice as generous as the EU
and OECD averages.
We'll also tackle fraud in our
Covid schemes with £100m to set
up a new HMRC task force of
around 1,000 investigators,
as well as new measures and
new investment in HMRC to clamp
down on tax avoidance
and evasion.
The full details are
set out in the red book.
Madam deputy speaker, the
government is providing
businesses with over £100bn
of support to get through this
pandemic.
So it is fair and
necessary to ask them
to contribute to our recovery.
So the second step
I am taking today
is that in 2023, the rate
of corporation tax paid
on company profits will
increase to 25 per cent.
Even after this change,
the United Kingdom
will still have the
lowest corporation tax
rate in the G7, lower
than the United States,
Canada, Italy, Japan,
Germany, and France.
We're also introducing
some crucial protections.
First, this new higher
rate won't take effect
until April 2023, well after
the point when the OBR expect
the economy to have recovered.
And even then, because
corporation tax is only
charged on company profits,
any struggling business
will by definition,
be unaffected.
Second, I'm protecting small
businesses with profits
of £50,000 or less by creating
a small profits rate maintained
at the current rate
of 19 per cent.
This means, around 70
per cent of companies,
1.4m businesses will be
completely unaffected.
And third, we will introduce
a taper above £50,000 so that
only businesses with profits of
a quarter of a million pounds
or greater will be taxed at
the full 25 per cent rate.
That means only 10
per cent of companies
will pay the full higher rate.
So yes, it's a tax rise
on company profits,
but only on the larger,
more profitable companies,
and only in two years' time.
And I wanted to
announce this now,
because I think for
business, certainty matters.
For the next two years, I'm
also making the tax treatment
of losses significantly more
generous by allowing businesses
to carry back losses of
up to £2m for three years,
providing a significant
cash flow benefit.
This means companies can now
claim additional tax refunds
of up to £760,000.
And because of the current
8 per cent bank surcharge,
the implied overall tax rate
for banks would be too high.
So we will review
the surcharge to make
sure the combined rate of
tax on the UK banking sector
doesn't increase significantly
from its current level
and to make sure this
important industry remains
internationally competitive.
Madam deputy speaker, these
are significant decisions
to have taken, decisions no
chancellor wants to make.
I recognise they
might not be popular.
But they are honest.
And let's consider
the alternatives.
The first is to do nothing,
to leave our deficit
problem untreated, our debt
problem for someone else
in the future to deal with.
That has never been the way
of a Conservative government.
And nor do I believe
it can be the way
of a responsible chancellor.
Another alternative
would be to try and find
all the savings we need
from public spending.
But when we said at
the last election
that we were the party of public
services, people believed us.
And they were right
to believe us.
And when we said we'd
be the party that
invests in new
infrastructure, they
were right to believe that too.
The only other alternative would
be to increase the rates of tax
on working people.
But I don't believe that
would be right either.
So I believe our
approach, while bold,
is compatible with
our duty as a fiscally
responsible and business
friendly government.
This is the right
choice, and I'm
confident it will
command public assent.
I have one final
announcement on business tax.
With the lowest
corporation tax in the G7
and a new small
profits rate, the UK
will have a
pro-business tax regime.
But we need to do
even more to encourage
businesses to invest right now.
Business investment
creates jobs,
lifts growth, spurs innovation
and drives productivity.
For decades, we've lagged
behind our international peers.
Right now, while many
businesses are struggling,
others have been able to build
up significant cash reserves.
We need to unlock
that investment.
We need an
investment-led recovery.
So today, I can announce
the super-deduction.
For the next two years,
when companies invest,
they can reduce their
tax bill, not just
by a proportion of the cost of
that investment as they do now,
or even by 100 per
cent of their cost,
the so-called full expensing
that some have called for.
With the super-deduction, they
can now reduce their tax bill
by 130 per cent of the cost.
Hear, hear.
Let me give the
house an example.
Under the existing rules, a
construction firm buying £10m
of new equipment could
reduce their taxable income
in the year they
invest by just £2.6m.
With the super-deduction they
can now reduce it by GBP £13m.
We've never tried this
before in our country.
The OBR have said it will boost
business investment by 10 per
cent, around £20bn
more per year.
It makes our tax regime for
business investment truly world
leading, lifting us from
30th in the OECD to 1st.
And worth £25bn during the
two years that is in place,
this will be the biggest
business tax cut in modern
British history.
Bold, unprecedented
action to get companies
investing, creating jobs, and
driving our economic recovery.
Madam deputy speaker, let
me now turn to duties.
This is a tough time
for hospitality.
So I can confirm that the
planned increases in duties
for spirits like Scotch
whisky, wine, cider,
and beer will all be cancelled.
All alcohol duties frozen
for the second year
in a row, only the third
time in two decades.
And right now, to keep
the cost of living low,
I'm not prepared to increase
the cost of a tank of fuel.
So the planned increase in
fuel duty is also cancelled.
Madam deputy
speaker, this budget
protects the jobs
and livelihoods
of the British people.
This Budget is honest
about the challenges
facing our public finances and
how we will begin to fix them.
And this Budget does
one other thing.
It lays the foundations
of our future economy,
the third part of our plan.
If we want a better
future economy,
we have to make it happen.
We have to do things that
have never been done before.
The world is not
going to be any less
competitive after coronavirus.
So it's not enough to
have some general desire
to grow the economy.
We need a real commitment
to green growth.
It's not enough to have
some general desire
to increase productivity.
We need a real
commitment to give
every business, large
or small the opportunity
to grow, innovate, and succeed.
It's not enough to have a
general desire to create jobs.
We need a real commitment to
create jobs where people are
and change the economic
geography of this country.
And we can't strengthen
our domestic economy
without remaining a global
outward-looking nation.
This future economy won't be
created in any one budget.
But today, we lay
the foundations.
Madam deputy speaker,
our future economy
needs investment
in green industries
across the United Kingdom.
So I can announce today the
first ever UK infrastructure
bank.
Located in Leeds,
the bank will invest
across the UK in public
and private projects
to finance the green
industrial revolution.
Beginning this spring, it will
have an initial capitalisation
of £12bn. .
And we expect it to support at
least £40bn of total investment
in infrastructure.
And I know my right honourable
friend, the member for Pudsey,
will particularly welcome
the location of this new
institution.
Offshore wind is an
innovative industry,
where the UK already has a
global competitive advantage.
So we're funding new
port infrastructure
to build the next generation
of offshore wind projects
in Teesside and Humberside.
And in November I
announced we would
launch a world-leading
sovereign green bond.
Today, we're going further,
announcing a new retail savings
product to give all UK savers
the chance to support green
projects, as my right
honourable friend,
the member for North East
Bedfordshire has campaigned
for.
We've also asked Dame Clara
Furse to establish a new group
to position the City
as the global leader
for voluntary, high-quality
carbon offset markets.
And underpinning
all of this will
be an updated monetary policy
remit for the Bank of England.
It reaffirms their
2 per cent target.
But now, it will also
reflect the importance
of environmental sustainability
and the transition to net zero.
Madam deputy speaker,
our future economy
will also address our
productivity problem
and support small business.
Too often smaller firms don't
have the time or resources
to acquire the extra
skills and training
they need to be more efficient,
more digital, and more
productive.
Thanks to Be the Business,
we have made a good start
at supporting these firms.
Today, the business
secretary and I
are going further with a
new set of UK-wide schemes,
Help to Grow.
First, Help to Grow Management
will help tens of thousands
of small and
medium-sized businesses
get world-class
management training.
Dozens of business schools
across the UK will offer a new
executive development programme
with mentoring and peer
learning.
And government
will contribute 90
per cent of the cost,
a real commitment
to learn more, make
more, and earn more.
Second, Help to Grow Digital.
With the pandemic many
businesses have moved online.
This has been a challenge.
But we want to turn it
into an opportunity.
We're going to help small
businesses develop digital
skills by giving them free,
expert training and a 50 per
cent discount on new
productivity-enhancing software
worth up to £5,000 each.
Both programmes will
commence by the autumn.
And I'd urge interested
businesses to register today
on gov.uk/helptogrow, a real
commitment to help over 100,000
businesses become more
innovative, more competitive,
and more profitable.
Madam deputy speaker,
a future economy
requires us to be
at the forefront
of the next scientific and
technological revolutions.
Becoming a scientific superpower
is something we can be.
I don't think that's
hubristic or unrealistic.
Our incredible vaccination
programme has shown the world
what this country is capable of.
So I'm providing an extra £1.6bn
today to continue the rollout
and improve our
future preparedness.
And I want to make
the UK the best
place in the world for
high-growth innovative
companies.
So I'm launching two
wide-ranging consultations
today to make sure our
research and development tax
relief and our enterprise
management incentives
are internationally competitive.
And my right honourable
friend, the home secretary,
knows that a scientific
superpower needs scientific
superstars.
So together, we're announcing
ambitious visa reforms,
aimed at highly
skilled migrants,
including a new unsponsored
points-based visa
to attract the best and most
promising international talent
in science, research, and
tech, new improved visa
processes for scale
ups and entrepreneurs,
and radically
simplified bureaucracy
for high-skilled
visa applications.
Now, as well as support
for innovation and access
to talent, high-growth firms
need access to capital.
To do that, we're taking steps
to give the pensions industry
more flexibility to unlock
billions of pounds from pension
funds into innovative
new ventures,
launching a new future
fund breakthrough
to help fill the
scale up funding gap,
and changing the rules to
encourage more countries,
more companies to list here.
Let me thank Lord Hill for
leading this landmark review.
The FCA will be consulting on
his proposals very shortly.
Madam deputy speaker,
our future economy
depends on remaining
a United Kingdom.
Millions of families and
businesses in Scotland, Wales,
and Northern Ireland
have contributed to
and benefited from our
coronavirus response.
And central to that
has been a Treasury
that acts for the
whole United Kingdom.
That's not a political point.
It's an undeniable truth.
The majority of
today's Budget measures
will apply directly to people in
all four nations of the United
Kingdom.
And I'm taking
further specific steps
with three accelerated
Scottish city and growth deals
in Ayrshire, Argyll and
Bute, and Falkirk, three more
in North Wales, Mid
Wales, and Swansea Bay.
And funding for the
Holyhead Hydrogen Hub,
the Global Centre of Rail
Excellence in Neath Port
Talbot, the Aberdeen
Energy Transition Zone,
as well as the Global Underwater
Hub and North Sea Transition
Deal, along with the first
allocations of the £400m New
Deal for Northern Ireland.
And through the Barnett formula,
the decisions I'm taking
in this Budget also increase
the funding for the devolved
administrations by £1.2bn
in Scotland, £740m in Wales,
and £410m for the Northern
Ireland executive.
And madam deputy speaker,
our future economy
demands a different
economic geography.
If we are serious about
wanting to level up,
that starts with the
institutions of economic power.
Few institutions are more
powerful than the one
I am enormously privileged
to lead, the Treasury.
Along with the other critical
economic departments,
including BEIS,
DIT, and MHDLG, we
will establish a new economic
campus in Darlington.
Hear, hear, hear.
And I know my honourable friend,
the member for Darlington,
will particularly welcome
this announcement.
Redrawing our economic
map means rebalancing
our economic investment.
I have already revised
the Treasury's Green Book
and set out the highest
sustained levels
of public investment across
the UK since the 1970s.
But we can go further.
I am announcing today over
a billion pounds for 45
new town's deals.
From Castleford to Clay Cross,
Rochdale to Rowley Regis,
and Whitby to Wolverhampton.
And let me pay tribute
to local leaders,
like the brilliant mayor
for the West Midlands, Andy
Street, who are making the case
for investment in their area.
We're also creating a £150m
fund to help communities across
the UK take ownership of
pubs, theatres, shops,
or local sports clubs
at risk of loss,
putting more power in the
hands of local people.
And I'm launching the first
round of the Levelling Up fund
today, inviting applications
from local areas
across the United Kingdom.
And I'm grateful to my
right honourable friends,
the transport secretary and
the communities secretary
for their support on
this crucial initiative.
Madam deputy speaker, I
have one final announcement
that exemplifies the
future economy, a policy
on a scale we've
never done before,
a policy to bring
investment trade,
and most importantly, jobs
right across this country.
To replace the
industries of the past
with green, innovative,
fast-growing new businesses.
To encourage free trade
and reinforce our position
as an outward looking trading
nation open to the world,
a policy we can
now only pursue now
that we are out of the
European Union, freeports.
Freeports are special economic
zones with different rules
to make it easier and
cheaper to do business.
They're well-established
internationally.
But we're taking
a unique approach.
Our freeports will
have simpler planning
to allow businesses to
build, infrastructure
funding to improve transport
links, cheaper customs,
with favourable tariffs, VAT,
or duties, and lower taxes,
with tax breaks to
encourage construction,
private investment,
and job creation.
An unprecedented economic boost
across the United Kingdom.
Freeports will be a
truly UK-wide policy.
And we will work constructively
with the Scottish, Welsh,
and Northern Irish
administration.
Today, I can announce the
eight freeport locations
in England, East Midlands
Airport, Felixstowe
and Harwich, Humber, Liverpool
City region, Plymouth, Solent,
Thames, and Teeside.
Eight new freeports in
eight English regions,
unlocking billions of pounds
of private sector investment,
generating trade and jobs
up and down the country.
I commend members
from across the house
for their campaigning.
But in particular, the
honourable members for Redcar,
Cleethorpes, and Great Grimsby,
as well as inspiring local
leaders, like Ben Houchen,
the mayor Tees Valley.
Hear, hear.
Madam Deputy Speaker,
let's take just one
of those places, Teeside.
In the past, it was
known for its success
in industries like steel.
Now, when I look to
the future of Teeside,
I see old industrial sites
being used to capture
and store carbon, vaccines
being manufactured,
offshore wind turbines,
creating clean energy
for the rest of the
country, all located
within a freeport
with the Treasury
just down the road and
a UK infrastructure bank
only an hour away.
I see innovative, fast-growing
businesses hiring local people
into decent
well-paid green jobs.
I see people designing,
manufacturing,
and exporting incredible
new products and services.
I see people putting
down roots in places
they are proud to call home.
I see a people optimistic and
ambitious for their future.
That, madam deputy speaker,
is the future economy
of this country.
Hear, hear.
And so, whilst
this last year has
been a test unlike any other,
that which we are, we are.
The fundamentals of our
character as a people
have not changed.
Still determined, still
generous, still fair,
that's what got us
through the last year.
It's what will guide us through
the next decade and beyond.
This time last year, we set
out to deliver on the promises
we made to the British people.
But the most important
promise was implicit
and in truth, is made
by every government
irrespective of their politics.
And that is to do
what must be done
when the danger is imminent
and when no one else can.
Today, we set out
a plan to protect
the jobs and livelihoods
of the British people.
But the promises that
underpin that plan
remain unchanged from
those we pledged ourselves
to 12 long months ago, to
unite and lead, to level up,
to create a world-class
education system,
to keep our streets safe,
to keep our NHS strong,
to support the most vulnerable,
to reform and improve
public services, to grow the
economy, to spread prosperity,
to extend the awesome
power of opportunity
to all corners of the
United Kingdom, and yes,
to be honest and fair
in all that we do.
Madam deputy speaker,
an important moment
is upon us, a moment of
challenge and of change.
Of difficulties, yes,
but of possibilities too.
This is a Budget that
meets that moment,
and I commend it to the House.
Hear, hear, hear.